# Evident framework for Achilles Confidential VMs

> As it stands, this is a work in progress. The code is not yet ready for production environments and may contain bugs or security vulnerabilities.

## Overview

_Evident_ is a framework for secure lifecycle management of Confidential VMs in public clouds. It automates remote attestation, enhances transparency of cloud trust models, and enables verifiable deployment and interaction with virtual machines executing confidential workloads (e.g., AI inference or federated learning).

This framework is workload-agnostic and can be used with any Confidential VM offering (for now, only AWS and Google Cloud are supported). There is no need to modify the workloads or applications running inside these VMs, as intended by the Confidential VM paradigm. However, in order to achieve the best security guarantees available, the platform in which workloads are executed must be properly configured. _Evident_ provides a set of tools and suggested practices to achieve this goal.

## Components

The _Evident_ framework consists of the following components:

- **Server** - A lightweight agent that is responsible for collecting evidence of the Confidential VM's state and aiding in the remote attestation process.
- **Client** - A command-line interface tool that allows users to attest a Confidential VM running the _Evident_ Server.

## Lifecycle

The typical lifecycle of a Confidential VM using the _Evident_ framework involves the following steps:

1. **Building the VM image**: Users will build a VM image using Nix, consuming the Nix flake provided in `image/flake.nix`. This flake outputs a minimal VM image that includes the _Evident_ Server and its dependencies. Users can customize the VM image (to include their respective workloads) by consuming the flake in their own flake or by copying the `image` directory and modifying the configuration directly. Configurations for exemplary workloads will be provided. The _Evident_ Client tool can be used to build the VM image (`build` mode), which will call the necessary Nix commands under the hood.
2. **Measuring the VM image**: To achieve the best security guarantees, users should measure the VM image. This results in a JSON file containing the expected measurements of the VM image, which are required for the remote attestation process. The _Evident_ Client tool can be used to measure the VM image (`measure` mode).
3. **Uploading the VM image**: It is recommended to use the _Edgeless Systems_'s Uplosi tool to automate the process of uploading the VM image to the cloud provider. This tool can be used for various cloud providers and ensures that the image is properly usable as a Confidential VM image. Guidance on the use of this tool can be found in `infrastructure/uplosi` and in the [tool's repository](https://github.com/edgelesssys/uplosi). Alternatively, users can use the cloud provider's native tools, following their documentation for uploading VM images.
4. **Deploying Confidential VMs**: It is recommended to use _HashiCorp_'s Terraform tool to manage a Confidential VM deployment. This infrastructure-as-code tool allows users to define and manage their cloud resources in a declarative way. In `infrastructure/`, you can find examples of Terraform configurations for basic deployments of Confidential VMs using Terraform.
5. **Attesting Confidential VMs**: Users can use _Evident_ Client in `attest` mode to remotely attest a Confidential VM. At this point, all the required information should already be generated by previously executed steps. Note that the required information may be shared, therefore, attestation is not limited to the Confidential VM owner.

### Extensibility and Usability Features

#### _Evident_ Client Terraform plug-in

Remote attestation can be automated directly in Terraform, making deployments dependent on the success of the remote attestation. This plug-in is not yet published, but it can be installed and used locally.

#### VM Image Distribution

In the same way application packages are distributed, Confidential VM images may be too. This feature allows entities to endorse a VM image build result, particularly useful for larger services/workloads where the build process may take too long or too much resources. Parties that trust the distributing entity may consume the VM image immediately. Others, with the resources to build the VM image themselves may do so by deriving the build instructions packaged with the image.
Furthermore, taking advantage of Nix hermetic builds, bit-by-bit reproducibility may be achieved for the entire VM image. In such cases, the reproduced image should match the distributed one, assuring the consumer that the distributing entity endorses also the behaviour of the image (since it is exactly the same).

To accomodate this scenario, the _Evident_ framework supports:

- _Evident_ Client `package` mode: builds, measures and endorses a VM image build inputs and output. This information is captured in a `MANIFEST` file, signed at build-time.
- (in progress) _Evident_ Client `reproduce` mode: takes a `MANIFEST` file, derives and follows the build instructions. Then measures the output VM image and checks if the endorsed metrics in the `MANIFEST` file correspond to the independently built VM image.

The actual distribution process is out-of-scope for the _Evident_ framework, but these operations provide the primitives to reliably distribute VM images to possibly untrusting parties.

#### Attestation Certificates (in progress)

For certain trust models, the remote attestation process may be executed by a trusted entity. In this case, a certificate issued by this entity upon a successful remote attestation would suffice as trustable evidence of the VM's state and security guarantees.

To accomodate this scenario, the _Evident_ framework supports:

- _Evident_ Server `keygen`: Generates an instance key pair on start-up.
- _Evident_ Client `serve` mode: listens for remote attestation requests, _i.e._, Confidential VMs may ask for a certain client to perform the remote attestation process onto themselves (assuming that the requesting machine is running _Evident_ Server). If the remote attestation is successful, the _Evident_ Client issues a certificate for the target instance's public key. The required expected measurements must be accessible to the _Evident_ Client.
- _Evident_ Server `request_certificate` build feature: as soon as the _Evident_ Server is ready to aid the remote attestation process, it requests a known endpoint to remotely attest itself. Upon a successful remote attestation, it installs the offered certificate that covers its public key in a well-known location in the file-system. Other services/workloads may use this certificate for their use case (_e.g._ as a TLS certificate).

This mechanism is composable, and, therefore, scalable. VM images may be loaded with both _Evident_ Server and Client to form an attestation hierarchy, as _Evident_ Client will use its own instance private key to endorse other attestation certificates.

#### _Evident_ Client Proxy (in progress)

This feature enables users to make use of _Evident_ Client functionalities through a web browser interface. This is particularly useful for users that are not comfortable with command-line
interfaces or for use cases where a web interface is more suitable. _Evident_ Client should run in `proxy` mode to enable this feature. It opens a backend server that listens for HTTP requests and serves a web interface for browser compatibility.

## Repository Structure

```
achilles-cvm/
├── infrastructure/
│   ├── ...
│   ├── envs            # examples of terraform working directories for different environments
│   ├── modules         # basic IaC deployments examples
│   └── uplosi          # uplosi configuration files example
├── image/              # Nix configuration files for minimal confidential VM image
│   ├── ...
│   ├── flake.nix
│   ├── LICENSE
│   └── NOTICE
├── proto/              # protobuf protocol message definitions between client and server
├── client/             # evident-client source
├── server/             # evident-server source
│   ├── ...
│   └── flake.nix
├── justfile
├── INSTRUCTIONS.md     # instructions to use the framework
├── README.md
└── LICENSE
```
